---
layout: page
title: WPA2 4-Way Handshake 🫂​
permalink: /notes/network-security/wpa2-4way-handshake/
---

## Prerequisites

1. IEEE 802.11 Link-Layer Fundamentals.

The 4-Way Handshake operates at Layer 2, not at the IP or TCP level. It is therefore necessary to understand how a wireless station (STA) and an access point (AP) interact within the 802.11 protocol and have familiarity with management, control and data frames. 

2. Key Derivation and Symmetric Encryption.

3. Nonces and Replay Protection.

Nonces are critical to ensure session freshness and prevent key reuse. 
Nonces must be unique under the same key, and replay counters prevent message duplication attacks; this is necessary to analyze vulnerabilities such as KRACK.

4. Authentication and Message Integrity.

The 4-Way Handshake relies on Message Integrity Codes (MIC) to confirm that both parties derived the same session key. Therefore you should know the difference between encryption and integrity, and how a MIC proves key possession.

## 4-Way Handshake

The purpose of the 4-Way Handshake is to  derive fresh session keys (PTK) but before the it begins, the following steps occur at the IEEE 802.11 level:

- The client performs **802.11 authentication** (often “Open System”, which is not password-based authentication).
- The STA associates with the AP and negotiates security parameters through RSN (Robust Security Network) information elements.
- At this point, both parties  share a **Pairwise Master Key (PMK)**.

In WPA2-Personal, the PMK is derived from the WiFi passphrase: 
PMK = PBKDF2(passphrase, SSID, SSID_length, 4096 iterations, 256-bit output)

The PMK is never transmitted over the air.

### 1. Message 1 (AP → STA)

**Parameters sent:**
- ANonce (random value generated by the AP)
- Replay Counter
- Key Information flags

**What happens:**
- The STA generates its own random value (**SNonce**).
- STA derives the **Pairwise Transient Key (PTK)** using PMK, ANonce, SNonce, AP MAC address and STA MAC address.

Including both MAC addresses ensures that the derived key is bound to that specific STA–AP pair, preventing impersonation or session hijacking by another device.

At this stage, the PTK is not yet confirmed.

The PTK is internally divided into:
- KCK (Key Confirmation Key) – used for MIC computation
- KEK (Key Encryption Key) – used to encrypt the GTK
- TK (Temporal Key) – used for encrypting unicast data traffic

### 2. Message 2 (STA → AP)

**Parameters sent:**
- SNonce
- Replay Counter
- MIC (Message Integrity Code) computed using KCK is sent in clear

**What happens:**
- The AP now has all inputs required to derive the same PTK:
  - PMK
  - ANonce
  - SNonce
  - Both MAC addresses
- The AP computes the PTK and verifies the MIC.

If the MIC is valid, the AP confirms that the STA possesses the PMK.


### 3. Message 3 (AP → STA)

**Parameters sent:**
- Replay Counter
- MIC 
- Encrypted GTK (protected using KEK)
- Key Information flags (including install and secure indicators)

**What happens:**
- The STA verifies the MIC to confirm the AP derived the same PTK.
- The STA installs the PTK (TK) for unicast encryption.
- The STA decrypts and installs the GTK for broadcast/multicast traffic.

Replay counters ensure that duplicated or delayed Message 3 frames are detected. Improper handling of this step led to vulnerabilities such as KRACK, where key reinstallation caused nonce reuse.


### 4. Message 4 (STA → AP)

**Parameters sent:**
- Replay Counter
- MIC 

**What happens:**
- The AP verifies the MIC.
- Both parties confirm successful key installation.
- Secure encrypted communication begins.

---

## Vulnerability Analysis

The WPA2 4-Way Handshake is designed to provide mutual key confirmation, freshness and replay protection; however its security depends on correct assumptions and proper implementation. 
I suggest you to consult the projects too by the moment they explore the mechanism and how it works evaluating practical activities and tool such as Wireshark and Aircrack-ng suite.


### 1. Deauthentication Abuse

Management frames are not protected in traditional WPA2.

An attacker can:
- Send forged deauthentication frames.
- Cause DoS.
- Force clients to reconnect.
- Trigger handshake capture.

Protected Management Frames (802.11w) mitigate this issue, therefore it is mandatory in WPA3.

Follow the projects for more: [Pwngotchi](/projects/Pwngotchi/) and [WPA2 Deauthentication](/projects/WPA2_Deauthentication/)


### 2. Offline Dictionary Attacks

In WPA2-PSK mode, capturing the 4-Way Handshake, precisely Msg 1 and 2, allows an attacker to perform offline password guessing.

The attacker uses:
- Password picked from the Dictionary (i.e rockyou.txt)
- ANonce
- SNonce
- MAC addresses
- Captured MIC

For each candidate passphrase:
1. Derive PMK using PBKDF2.
2. Derive PTK.
3. Compute MIC.
4. Compare with captured Msg 2 MIC.

If the MIC matches, the password is correct.

This attack does not break AES or the handshake itself, but exploits low-entropy secrets.

Follow the project for more: [WPA2 Deauthentication](/projects/WPA2_Deauthentication/)

### 3. PMKID-Based Attacks

An evolution of the dictionary attack allows capturing the PMKID directly from the first EAPOL exchange, without forcing a full handshake.

This reduces operational complexity for attackers and increases exposure of poorly secured networks.

Unfortunately it is sent rarely, I never found it in my tests.


### 4. Evil Twin AP

**Threat model:**  
An attacker attempts to take over an active session between a legitimate STA and AP.

The inclusion of both MAC addresses in PTK derivation binds the session key to a specific device pair, preventing a third party from reusing a captured handshake to derive valid session keys for another device.

However, hijacking can still occur at higher layers if:

- The attacker forces disconnection (via deauthentication).
- The attacker sets up an Evil Twin AP with the same SSID.
- The client reconnects to the malicious AP.

In this case, the protocol itself is not cryptographically broken, but the trust model at the wireless layer is exploited.

Follow tha ShadowApple project for more: [Shadow Apple](/projects/Shadow_Apple/) and [Bruce Firmware](https://bruce.computer)

### 3. Replay Attacks

Replay protection relies on:

- Nonce uniqueness
- Replay counters in EAPOL-Key frames
- Proper key installation logic

If replay counters are strictly enforced and nonces are never reused, replayed handshake messages should be rejected.

However, vulnerabilities such as **KRACK (Key Reinstallation Attack)** showed that some implementations:

- Accepted retransmitted Message 3
- Reinstalled the same key
- Reset nonce/packet number counters

This broke a fundamental requirement:
> Nonces must never repeat under the same encryption key.

Nonce reuse can lead to:
- Keystream reuse in CCMP
- Packet decryption
- Packet forgery under specific conditions

This vulnerability was implementation-dependent but exposed protocol fragility.

---

## Defensive Considerations

- Enable **Protected Management Frames (PMF)** when supported
- Use strong, high-entropy passphrases
- Prefer WPA3 when available
- Monitor for abnormal deauthentication activity

---

For more about WPA Security I suggest you to consult [Mathy Vanhoef's GitHub profile](https://github.com/vanhoefm), he is Prof. Computer Science at @KU_Leuven (Belgium) who Discovered KRACK and FragAttacks and great resercher for other many reasons!
